[Add] Design doc for CodeFlare SDK (#703)
project-codeflare/codeflare-sdk: docs/designs/CodeFlare-SDK-design-doc.md

2. Any call made to the server should have a client instance passed through it. By default, the SDK should use the same client for all operations unless otherwise specified. For example, the client used to list clusters should also be used to fetch cluster details. The codebase should be designed so that these operations are either methods of the same client (e.g., a k8s client, RayJob client, TrainingClient) or the client instance is passed as an argument to the methods.
3. Errors returned from the API server, to the extent possible, should be wrapped and handled explicitly.

## Test Coverage:
The project should aim to maintain reasonable test coverage to ensure code quality. Wherever possible, new lines of code should be accompanied by corresponding test cases. Reviewers are encouraged to exercise discretion when merging pull requests (PRs) that result in a drop in test coverage percentage compared to the current state. To aid in tracking coverage, external tools like Codecov can be integrated with the repository, allowing for easier monitoring and ensuring that the codebase maintains a robust level of test coverage over time.

> ## Release:

Reviewer: Should we mention here or the `Documentation and Examples` heading that we use code documentation tools to automate code documentation on release?

Author: I've added a sentence on automation tools for API documentation in the end. Wdyt?

This document should be followed when adding new functionality along with being updated as the design evolves.

## Objectives
1. Provide a Pythonic, user-friendly interface for interaction with distributed workloads components.
2. Integrate with Kueue for managing workload queues, quota management, job orchestration and scheduling.
3. Provide separate functionalities for data scientists/ MLops engineers and platform administrators.
4. Allow data scientists to manage ML workflows, workloads and jobs.
5. Leverage Ray and [Kubeflow][Kubeflow] for workloads and jobs.
6. Ensure extensibility to accommodate future integrations with other tools and frameworks.
7. Follow best practices in codebase to make it easier for developers to maintain the project.

## Architecture

### CodeFlare stack components overview:

> 1. [CodeFlare SDK][codeflare_sdk_gh]: Primary user-facing component, offering a Python-native interface that bridges users with the underlying services in the stack. This SDK abstracts away much of the complexity, providing a unified and accessible method for submitting and managing the running of distributed AI workloads on OpenShift clusters.

Author: Good point, modified.

On a high level, the interaction between a data scientist, CodeFlare SDK and the rest of the components are explained as below:

![Diagram-1](../images/codeflare_stack_arch.png)

The role of the SDK in the model training and tuning stack remains consistent on the client side, regardless of any changes to the components it interacts with on the cluster.

![Diagram-2](../images/codeflare_sdk.png)

#### Considerations while designing SDK:
1. Ease of use and integration: The SDK’s primary role is to abstract Kubernetes specifics. It should provide simple interfaces for interacting with any of the model training components on the server side.
2. Lightweight: The SDK runs client-side and should minimize resource consumption. It must prioritize responsiveness and user experience. For example, using a polling mechanism to fetch status instead of a constant resource watch.
3. Extensibility: The SDK currently integrates well with the CodeFlare stack, which uses Ray and TorchX (pytorch) distributed framework. In the future, components used for distributed training/tuning (as seen in fig [2]) should remain interchangeable.

> 4. Security: The SDK must ensure users see only the information they are authorized to view. Authentication occurs on the client, while admission and validation are handled server-side. Kubernetes RBAC makes things easier.

Author: Good catch! My bad, I was meaning to say that it's the responsibility of the client side tool to send any request that contains all the required credentials (tokens, certificates etc) that are required for validation. Though actual authentication is not SDK's responsibility, but making sure that the request itself has all the credentials in its header  is the client-side authentication which is intended to be referred here. Have reworded it, let me know if it reads out better.

> 5. Typed Object Creation: The client should only allow the creation of known, typed K8s resources. This prevents arbitrary payloads from reaching the server which could be a threat. (configuring AppWrapper resource template is a concern here).

Reviewer 2: I think this section needs to be talked about from an AW perspective. Are we proposing we take out AW support from the SDK?

Author: Have reworded this to not explicitly mention that AppWrapper needs to be removed, as it's not a trivial process. It now rather states that it is a beast practice to allow only typed-object creation. The other approach would be to be able to refactor AppWrapper in such a way that there is validation on the client side to verify if the object being passed is a valid k8s yaml. Since we cannot completely get rid of it, it would be better to at least workaround and ensure we follow the best possible practice from our end.

> 6. Version Compatibility: The SDK must maintain compatibility between client and server versions. Backward compatibility should be ensured even if one side is upgraded.

Reviewer 2: It wouldn't hurt here to point out that we use SEMVER

#### Codebase Modularization:

> The CodeFlare-SDK codebase requires refactoring and modularization to facilitate easier addition or modification of components. The key requirements for this refactor include:

Reviewer 2: I think this needs to be reworded. This is the design doc for future development, so detailing what needs to change, imo, shouldn't be carried out here.

Author: Have reworded this section to instead say that this is the best modular practice we need to follow. Instead of explicitly mentioning that it needs to be refactored. This will make sure that in future when we add any component we still follow the guidelines mentioned here. Let me know if this sounds better.

> 1. Component Structure: The SDK will be divided into distinct components:

Reviewer 2: Whilst work is under way of refactoring the sdk, these bulllet points read correctly, however, once the refactor is complete, this should be updated to the current tense

Author: Refactored as mentioned in https://github.com/project-codeflare/codeflare-sdk/pull/703#discussion_r1796345197

  - Modules for commands, helpers, and utilities that interact with Kubernetes (OpenShift) clusters.
  - Helpers specific to framework clusters like Ray.
2. Self-Contained Packages: Each Python package will function as an independent, self-contained module with its own dedicated functionality. This will make it easier to manage, maintain, and extend the SDK.
3. Testing: Unit tests for each API will be located within their respective submodules to ensure:
  - Comprehensive test coverage, closely tied to the implementation, facilitating easier association between code and tests.

>   - Integration and upgrade tests that span multiple modules will be managed separately, ensuring robust validation of both individual and end-to-end functionality.

Author: I have created a separate section for code coverage, and mentioned codecov as an example for external tools so that later if we find something better than that we can adopt it.

> The overall codebase would be structured as below:

Author: Have modified the section to sound more like it's a guideline rather than something which is right now. Does that sounds better than before?

> The overall codebase would be structured as below:

Reviewer: That looks good :+1:

```

> codeflare_sdk/

Author: Have modified the project structure to just show an example of how modularised code, tests in each package and overall the repository should look like. This is so that this just doesn't to what we have now, but something which we can extend later too. Let me know if it seems reasonable.

> codeflare_sdk/

Reviewer: That looks great :+1:

2. Any call made to the server should have a client instance passed through it. By default, the SDK should use the same client for all operations unless otherwise specified. For example, the client used to list clusters should also be used to fetch cluster details. The codebase should be designed so that these operations are either methods of the same client (e.g., a k8s client, RayJob client, TrainingClient) or the client instance is passed as an argument to the methods.
3. Errors returned from the API server, to the extent possible, should be wrapped and handled explicitly.

## Release:
A new version of CodeFlare SDK will be released once every three weeks.
For details on the release support matrix with other CodeFlare components, refer [here][codeflare_compatibility_matrix].

> RHOAI support matrix: CodeFlare SDK APIs fall under [Tier 2][RH_customer_API_support] support on `RHOAI` platform. This implies than an API would be support in for `n-1` major versions for a minimum of 9 months.

Reviewer 2: Unless I'm missing something (which is quite possible) we don't currently have a branching strategy which ties CFSDK releases to RHOAI releases. We should confirm that CFSDK is continuously scanned for CVEs for all supported versions i.e. for 9 months after inclusion in a RHOAI release and 17 months in the case of a LTS EUS release. 
Do we have a plan in place here to be able to easily identify the packages and upgrade them in case of CVEs etc.?

Author: Good point, CVE fixes need to be addressed here. IIRC the downstream synk scanner and upstream Depedabots look for CVEs, and they are fixed in here. I'll check with @ChristianZaccaria on the process and come back to updating this.

Author: Have added a `CVE Management` section that talks about Snyk downstream and Dependabot upstream with automation around making sure that version of SDK shipped in NB is scanned throughout its lifecycle.

## Security:
Currently, users must manually manage mTLS certificates and re-authenticate Ray clients when connecting to Ray clusters, though the CodeFlare SDK offers helpers to streamline this process (as seen [here][cert_generation]). In the future, integration with a service mesh like Istio will automate mTLS setup and certificate management via a sidecar proxy, eliminating the need for manual certificate handling and client re-authentication.

## Documentation and Examples:
The following are the documentation sources for users which will need to remain updated:
1. Upstream documentation - includes `README` and examples in `docs/` folder.
2. Demo notebooks - The NBs which are to be tested and updated to ensure that they are upto date with the most recent changes.

> 3. For RHOAI customers - [Official documentation][DW_RHOAI_docs] will be updated after every release.

Reviewer 2: lets add ODH here too

Author: IIUC ODH support cycle would be the same as RHOAI. Will just cross-verify once again. Leaving the conversation open for now.

Author: Looks like it's the same. Have modified the statement.

# CodeFlare SDK Design Document

Team: Distributed Workloads - Orchestration

## Introduction

> This document outlines the design of the Project CodeFlare SDK, a Python SDK that facilitates interactions between users and the distributed workloads component of Red Hat OpenShift AI(RHOAI)/ OpenDataHub(ODH). Users, in this instance, are both data scientists and MLOps Engineers. The SDK provides a high-level abstraction for managing machine learning(ML) workflows, jobs and distributed computing resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This document outlines the design of the Project CodeFlare SDK, a Python SDK that facilitates interactions between users and the distributed workloads component of Red Hat OpenShift AI(RHOAI)/ OpenDataHub(ODH). Users, in this instance, are both data scientists and MLOps Engineers. The SDK provides a high-level abstraction for managing machine learning(ML) workflows, jobs and distributed computing resources.
```
Should this be more generic? Are we limiting our focus to RHOAI and ODH specifically?

Author: > Are we limiting our focus to RHOAI and ODH specifically?

Ideally the CodeFlare stack can be used on any k8s clusters (through ODH or standalone). But since it is being shipped with RHOAI and ODH, the SDK design mentions that the intention is to make interaction with those components easier. Is supporting CodeFlare components standalone something we are planning in future (also what would be the use case)? I believe as a data scientist I would prefer to adopt a whole ecosystem of components on my cluster (including NBs, IDE etc - though ODH), rather than just a piece of training stack. Wdyt?

Reviewer 3: >I believe as a data scientist I would prefer to adopt a whole ecosystem of components on my cluster (including NBs, IDE etc - though ODH), rather than just a piece of training stack. Wdyt?

Candidly, as a data scientist I think I would want to use an SDK by a trusted source. the CodeFlare SDK is not well known among the community and it is a product we are advocating for customers to use. That's absolutely fine but I do think DS customers will view it differently than if it was from Kubeflow or KubeRay (ignoring the fact that we are actually making their lives easier). And I think that perception could influence adoption.

I don't think that should change what we do in the short term but it is a realistic gap in our current strategy; i.e., CodeFlare has a very limited community and limited brand awareness so it may face adoption challenges. Of course, we can see how this plays out with customers but I want to call it out.

Author: Completely fair, I feel we should track this somewhere. How about open an issue in here and also in JIRA - so that we can revisit when we get to having some of the codeFlare components upstream. 

Having it upstream would help us to easily cross-reference wherever required.

This document should be followed when adding new functionality along with being updated as the design evolves.

## Objectives
1. Provide a Pythonic, user-friendly interface for interaction with distributed workloads components.
2. Integrate with Kueue for managing workload queues, quota management, job orchestration and scheduling.
3. Provide separate functionalities for data scientists/ MLops engineers and platform administrators.
4. Allow data scientists to manage ML workflows, workloads and jobs.

> 5. Leverage Ray and [Kubeflow][Kubeflow] for workloads and jobs.

Reviewer 3: I think you are missing a valid url here

Author: The URLs are all stacked at the end of document to make it easier for reading MD without URLs distracting (https://github.com/project-codeflare/codeflare-sdk/pull/703/files#diff-387eb08ad63e5ef0159223fefdf1359e9ae0573ddecfd3e2032fdb4e35275c9fR131-R141) 😅

6. Ensure extensibility to accommodate future integrations with other tools and frameworks.

> 7. Follow best practices in codebase to make it easier for developers to maintain the project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
7. Follow best practices in the codebase to make it easier for developers to maintain the project.
```

> ## Architecture

Reviewer 3: It may be useful to add a diagram here

3. [AppWrapper][appwrapper_gh]: AppWrapper groups multiple Kubernetes resources into a single, logical workload for easier management. It is integrated with Kueue and accepts the k8s components to be created and managed through a template in the spec which is untyped in the form of RawExtension.

4. [KubeRay][kuberay_gh]: Operator designed specifically for managing and orchestrating Ray clusters on Kubernetes. It automates the creation and lifecycle management of Ray clusters and jobs, ensuring that they can scale and operate efficiently on K8s. KubeRay also provides a Python client library, enabling developers and data scientists to interact with Ray components directly within their applications.

5. [Kueue][kueue_gh]: Batch workload queuing and scheduling system designed to optimize resource allocation in K8s clusters. It ensures that Ray Clusters are only scheduled when sufficient resources are available, preventing resource contention and maximizing cluster efficiency. This component plays a critical role in balancing resource availability with the demand for distributed workloads, facilitating efficient job execution.

> On a high level, the interaction between a data scientist, CodeFlare SDK and the rest of the components are explained as below:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At a high level, the interaction between a data scientist, CodeFlare SDK, and the rest of the components are explained below:
```

> ![Diagram-1](../images/codeflare_stack_arch.png)

Reviewer 3: Oh here's the diagram!

The role of the SDK in the model training and tuning stack remains consistent on the client side, regardless of any changes to the components it interacts with on the cluster.

![Diagram-2](../images/codeflare_sdk.png)

#### Considerations while designing SDK:
1. Ease of use and integration: The SDK’s primary role is to abstract Kubernetes specifics. It should provide simple interfaces for interacting with any of the model training components on the server side.

> 2. Lightweight: The SDK runs client-side and should minimize resource consumption. It must prioritize responsiveness and user experience. For example, using a polling mechanism to fetch status instead of a constant resource watch.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Lightweight: The SDK runs client-side and should minimize resource consumption. It must prioritize responsiveness and user experience. For example, using a polling mechanism to fetch status instead of constantly watching resources.
```

3. Extensibility: The SDK currently integrates well with the CodeFlare stack, which uses Ray and TorchX (pytorch) distributed framework. In the future, components used for distributed training/tuning (as seen in fig [2]) should remain interchangeable.
4. Security: The SDK must ensure users see only the information they are authorized to view. It's the responsibility of the SDK to generate an authenticated request by attaching the right credentials/token during every API call.

> 5. Typed Object Creation: The client to the extent possible should allow the creation of known, typed K8s resource. This prevents arbitrary payloads from reaching the server which could be a threat.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. Typed Object Creation: The client, to the extent possible, should allow the creation of known, typed K8s resources. This prevents arbitrary payloads from reaching the server which could be a threat.
```

2. Any call made to the server should have a client instance passed through it. By default, the SDK should use the same client for all operations unless otherwise specified. For example, the client used to list clusters should also be used to fetch cluster details. The codebase should be designed so that these operations are either methods of the same client (e.g., a k8s client, RayJob client, TrainingClient) or the client instance is passed as an argument to the methods.
3. Errors returned from the API server, to the extent possible, should be wrapped and handled explicitly.

## Test Coverage:
The project should aim to maintain reasonable test coverage to ensure code quality. Wherever possible, new lines of code should be accompanied by corresponding test cases. Reviewers are encouraged to exercise discretion when merging pull requests (PRs) that result in a drop in test coverage percentage compared to the current state. To aid in tracking coverage, external tools like Codecov can be integrated with the repository, allowing for easier monitoring and ensuring that the codebase maintains a robust level of test coverage over time.

## Release:

> A new version of CodeFlare SDK will be released once every three weeks.

Reviewer 3: That seems pretty frequently?

Author: Yeah, that's the process we have been following for entire stack. A release at the end of each sprint.

### CVE Management:
We currently use two approaches for scanning CVEs:
1. Dependabot is enabled to automatically bump dependencies with CVE fixes in the upstream repository.
2. A downstream Snyk scanner is used to identify vulnerabilities.

Depending on the severity of the issue, fixes are prioritized, and a new release with the necessary patches is tagged within the following three-week release window.
To streamline the CVE management process, it is recommended to automate security scans across multiple branches in the upstream repositories. This ensures that the SDK version used with each Notebook release remains free from vulnerabilities throughout its support cycle.

## Documentation and Examples:
The following are the documentation sources for users which will need to remain updated:
1. Upstream documentation - includes `README` and examples in `docs/` folder.

> 2. Demo notebooks - The NBs which are to be tested and updated to ensure that they are upto date with the most recent changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Demo notebooks - The NBs which are to be tested and updated to ensure that they are up to date with the most recent changes.
```
nit

Reviewer 3: +1
